Hello and welcome to another tutorial.
I'm going to continue our discussion on creating a simple hello world and compiling it to a native executable
binary.
We saw this already on the Mac OS platform and Linux platform and I said that in your Linux, if you
cannot compile, you probably are missing one of the one or more dependencies.
So you can look at the output.
What output or error native image tool creates right here.
For example, I ran it and it tells me that it appears that Lib SDA is missing and then you search to
Google and install the zlib one g hyphen dev for compilation.
We looked at the output stages both in the Mac, like all the details and in this lecture I'm going
to go into more details.
What this means, just a brief introduction.
We don't need to really be concerned that much with what this means.
Eventually, if the compilation succeeds, we get the executable binary.
But before that, let's also try to recap quickly how this native compilation works by creating a quick
helloworld application in Java and then using the global VM native image on the Windows platform to
compile it to native executable binaries.
So install native image, you download download basically gradle VM and then use the Google Updater
or the G2 in Windows.
It's the shell script, so you have to use a dot cmd and then you have to install Microsoft Visual Studio
Community Edition Native image on Windows only recognizes the default Windows platform toolchain, which
is RMS, V.C. or Microsoft Visual Compiler.
And then you have to run this script, shell script.
We see WAAS 64 dot bat, which I already showed you where you can find it.
You go into the build in the MSI community and then build auxiliary and then run this script.
This sets up the correct environment variables for your shell or the command prompt so that it can know.
It can find a slot x, which is the command line tool for calling the MSC compiler and native image
relies on finding that sealed exit so that it can compile to native executable binary.
And I also told you that the easiest way is to actually create an environment variable, a global environment
variable, and then basically so that when you just type it and execute it, it executes this shell
in terminal.
So compile helloworld java with Java C, you can use JDK 17 or the Java Sea that comes with the LLVM
17 and run native image CMD.
So know that this is a command line script.
This is not a native executable file, unlike Linux and Mac OS where the native image is actually an
executable on Windows, it's just a command line script and a class file.
So again, native image, we always run it on a class file, so let's head to windows and quickly do
this.
So here's my windows.
I have created this test directory on my desktop and I am going to.
So my virtual machine is running a little bit slow.
But what I'm going to do, I'm going to open up a CMD or command prime, the simple command prompt in
windows and then I'm going to create a Java file.
Hello World.
And then.
Just print the hello wall to the council.
So we're going to hear right click new.
Let's create a text file and then rename it to something.
Hello World Java.
All right.
My return machine freezes a little bit.
So right click new and then it takes the command and then we want to rename these to Hello World to
Java.
Okay.
And after that, I'm going to quickly open it up and then run the type to create a class, and then
we're going to compile it and then we're going to.
So, yes, let's change the extension.
And then right click.
I'm going to open it with a text editor on Windows.
I prefer to use notepad plus plus.
Now obviously in the future lectures I will switch to the Eclipse ID and we will see actually how to
set up the external tool in Eclipse ID so that it can automatically call the native image tool.
Now, if you're not familiar with the concept of external tool in Eclipse ID, I will go into the details
so you understand how how the meaning of the external tools that the eclipse provides.
So let's open it up with the external, basically with a notepad plus.
Plus.
All right, so we're going to say that public class.
Hello, world.
All right.
Just a routine and then a public static void main.
That's the entry point to our Java application, a string args.
And then in the main method, we're just going to say that system dot out dot print line.
Hello world from C++.
Hello.
World from C++ in Java.
And then exclamation marks and then semicolon.
We're going to save this.
Yes, we want to save this.
And then.
Obviously the first thing that we do, we compile and then we run our job application on the JV team
to make sure that there is no error.
There is nothing.
And after that we just compile the native executable binary.
So my recommendation is that always check your job application, run it on the JV team to make sure
everything works fine.
And after that at the final stage, compile it to the native executable binary.
So let's change our directory to this test directory on the desktop.
We're just going to drag and drop and then we have this Helloworld Java and then I'm going to say Java
hyphen, hyphen version and we're using open JDK 11 from Microsoft.
So did we define the overall home?
Yes.
And then we also on Windows, I also define the Bing directory.
Right.
So and we set that in order to use this.
Unfortunately, this program for us has a space in it.
So we kind of need to put these in double quotes describing and then for a backward slash, java hyphen,
hyphen version.
Now we shouldn't basically equate.
So this one.
So open JDK 17.
So we're going to also use a Java Sea and then we're going to say Hello World to Java, right?
So we're going to compile these.
And it's going to create the class file and put it there.
Right, done.
And now we're going to launch this our Java application, which is the class file on the Java, right,
because it's much easier.
So we're going to say grabbing instead of Java, see just Java.
And then we don't need to specify the class path or we can we just tell it this current directory and
then we're going to tell it the hello world.
And then we don't use the dot class.
Right.
And Hello World from C++ in Java.
So everything works fine.
Now if I want to finally compile to the native executable binary, I need to call the native image.
But if I just call the native image now and this class file is going to fail because if I look at my
path environment variable at the moment, it doesn't have any of the any of the RMS, V.C. or Microsoft
visual compiler.
Mark.
So visual issue is not added to the path environment variable, which means if I see a lot X hyphen
hyphen version, it's going to say that I cannot find clt x.
All right.
That's because it's not added to the path environment variable yet.
So the command prompt will terminal, it cannot find it.
So what should we do?
If you recall in the environment variables.
So in any terminal, if you type in V and hit enter.
All right, it's one more time.
It tells you which environment variables, which global environment variables are defined for your terminal.
Right in mac OS Windows Linux doesn't matter this end V works.
And then if you recall we defined a RMS, we c vars, right?
We define this environment variable, global environment variable for the operating system and it's
pointing to the VC var 64 dot bat and this is a shell script so we can just execute it right as we see
underscore vars.
So if I type it and hit enter, it's equivalent to typing this full path to this and let's see if the
space works fine or not.
No.
So we have to put it in double code so that the space spacing program files does it.
So now this executes and then it sets up the Microsoft Visual Studio to enter Developer Edition and
it's a pen's own all the required directory to the environment variable and it tells us that, hey,
I set it up for the 64 bit compilation, which is the correct I want 64 bit compilation instead of 32
bit.
And if I clear and look at my path environment variable again and you see that now there are a lot of
directories that from a MSC, VC, Microsoft Visual Studio that has been appended to the path.
Right.
Lots of directories.
That's why I recommend instead of trying to manually add these directories to the path, just define
that global environment variable as we see worse, that points to the right shell script that comes
with the marks of listed and just execute this environment variable each time.
Right?
So this works and now now that is set up.
If I say select exa, for example, hyphen, hyphen version, the terminal is able to find the right
tool right.
The CL, which is the command line interface for the calling, the MSC compiler.
And now I'm ready to call the native image on this class file.
So again, double quotes and then use our global environment variable grabbing directory.
Right?
And then backwards slash.
I believe forward slash might also work on windows, but here I'm using backwards slash native image
dot cmd.
It's a command line script and then we're going to tell it the hyphen CP here and then Hello World and
we don't specify the name and we kind of specify the name of the output file, let's say my app and
then hit enter.
It is going to take a few a little bit of time because I'm running on a virtual machine, but hopefully
this will finish up and we will get a native executable.
And we've we've seen in the past that the executable is already like ten, 11 megabytes, whereas our
class file is just like one kilobyte.
And the main reason obviously is that it has to compile a JVM added garbage collector and then compile
all the class files from the JDK.
So they all say basically require some space, ten megabytes or so.
So this is still doing some stuff.
Let's see if this is going to work.
Still waiting a little bit trying to.
So the first thing that it will output is the.
Is the version which version of grab me using.
So I'm going to let this to run and then let's head back to our PowerPoints.
So you write your class voice and then you run the native image CMD and then run it on the class file
that has the main method, and then it goes ahead and compiles and eventually you get a Hello World
exit.
And we said that in Mac OS and Linux, the executable files don't have any extension on Windows.
They have dot exe extension.
And you see here it's like 11, 12 megabytes which is very large, whereas your class file was only
one kilobyte.
Right?
So this executable file not only has your job application, it has a lot of stuff like a garbage collector,
a JVM, all class wise.
Now let's quickly go through the build stages, which is all the information that the Native Image tool
prints to the terminal in the process of compiling your Java application.
And here's the documentation.
So it's just a graph VM, the version and then reference hyphen manual and then the native image tool
and in the build output.
And so you can go let me just quickly open this up in a browser.
And then you will see that we can.
Basically, the material that I'm writing here, more or less a concise version of what's on the reference
manual.
In the future lectures, I will walk you through all the actual official documentation of the native
image on the VN website.
But for now, I just wrote a concise or very brief
basically explanation of what happens here.
It also has an example that what's going on and then it walks you through all the stages, right?
So first of all, the first stage is initialization.
Let's look at the Linux output.
It just tells you graph VM, native image generating hello world.
So nothing went wrong.
The native tool was able to execute, right?
So that's the first stage initialization in this stage.
The Native Image build process is set up and features are initialized and version info user provided
features right version info is basically here in the initialization version info global VM 22 something
we saw that in the most recent version.
They also print which GC is being used and which default toolchain is being used.
Right.
The version info of the native image process.
This string is also used for the Java VM version.
So in we saw that there are system properties that JVM uses and when you compile to the native executable
binary, you can still access these system properties using the system class write system dot get property
Java VM version within the generated image user provided features.
These are the extra system properties, right?
All features that are provided by the user or implicitly registered for the user.
For example, BI framework gradle VM Native Image deploys a number of internal features which are excluded
from this list.
All right.
And then the next step is performing analysis.
So performing analysis in this stage, it points to analysis is performed, which means the compiler
chases all the pointers on the stack, write all the references to see which objects they're pointing
to in the Java heap.
The Progress Indicator visualizes the number of analysis iterations.
You see these stars.
These are progress indicators, right?
So each star means one round of iteration.
So the progress indicator visualizes the number of analysis iterations.
A large number of iterations can indicate problems in the analysis likely caused by Misconfiguration
or a misbehaving feature.
Now performing analysis has to analyze a couple of different things.
One is reachable classes, fields and methods.
What this means is that if there are some classes in your application that your main method right doesn't
really rely on them, doesn't call them, doesn't use them.
And none of the classes that are used or the types that are used in main method, they don't really
use some of the classes.
Then those classes are not reachable and they're not going to be compiled because the compiler of the
native image is smart enough to know that your the entirety of your job application doesn't really depend
on them.
Remember that we're doing a static compilation, so the compiler at the compile time has to chase all
the pointers, all the types, all the figures, all the dependencies to eventually figure out which
classes are reachable and they have to be compiled or which classes are not reachable, then they have
no effect on your application reflection registrations, right?
If you're using Reflection API and access registrations, if some of the methods in your classes are
native methods, we already know that most of the JDK classes have at least the classes that are in
the core Java Lang package.
They have general access, right?
They have native methods and runtime compiled method, right?
So these are the things and if you look at here, it tells you, for example, in this output, 3251
classes reachable.
So your Java application depends on 3251 classes to be run.
Obviously, you didn't write 3000 classes in your job application.
We just wrote a simple hello world class, but the rest are the JDK dependencies 5529 fields reachable
and 16,881 methods reachable and in 28 classes, zero fields and 173 methods registered for reflection
57 classes, 58 fields and 51 methods registered for access, which means of all the dependencies of
your job application, there are 51 native methods that have to be registered and compiled and the compiler
has to figure them out in order for your Java application to successfully run.
Right?
So these are more like a statistics.
What's going on?
And after that building universe, this is where we start putting all these information together and
start compiling.
And this stage, a universe with all classes, fields and methods is built, which is then used to create
a native image.
Parsing methods right part parsing methods means in this stage the graph compiler, the native image
compiler parses all reachable methods.
Parsing just means it, tokenize them in a way that the compiler understands them.
And then because method it means it's source file, right?
Or basically classify these are Java, these are the way that Java JVM understands.
But now the compiler needs to compile them into native executable instructions for the CPU.
The progress indicator is printed periodically at an increasing interval and again, those stars are
showing you how long it's going to take to finish up this method.
Okay.
And then in lining methods, and I've mentioned this before in is a common technique that the compilers
use to save some time for calling and methods or functions.
Usually what happens here is that whenever you call a method or function in the actual file compiled
file, which is basically assembly instructions for the CPU, it says go to this memory address and
then basically a function is just a pointer, right?
It's an address in memory.
The CPU jumps to the memory address and then loads all the instructions, all the lines of the code
in a function or method are stored somewhere, and that block of memory has an address, which is the
method or function which points to it.
Right.
And in learning means the compiler copies all that code in the actual main method.
So or whatever other function is that is calling your method.
Therefore there is no jumping from one address to another to load the extra instructions.
And the compilers nowadays are very smart about this.
So in this stage, trivial method in learning is performed.
The Progress Indicator visualizes the number of in and iterations.
Right now we know that the Java compiler, Java C is a very dumb compiler, which means it really uses
any in learning.
Now Java C is good for for example, if you have a public aesthetic final field, it just replaced all
those basically fields with the actual value.
But Java C doesn't really do any optimization in terms of inline, so it's mainly the LLVM compiler
that does all these aesthetic analysis.
So in lining methods, you see this stage has four stars, which means actually there's quite.
Some time and effort to for the compiler to inline this a lot of methods.
Build stages, compiling methods.
So after we in line now we go ahead and do the compilation.
In this stage, the global compiler compiles all reachable methods to machine code.
Now again, it's smart about it and the reachable is the keyword here.
Now, a class might have a lot of methods, but your application might not use some of those methods.
Right?
They're just there, but they're not usable.
So the compiler doesn't compile those methods to native binaries because they don't have any effect
on your application.
They are never used.
Whereas in the java like the class file already includes the BI code for those methods.
But the compiler realizes that some of the methods are never used or called in your application, so
there is no point of compiling them.
So it's a smart about it and it means it's doing optimisation.
And previously we saw that there is an optimisation flag that you can pass to the Native Image compiler,
so you can turn the optimisation off, but then most likely the size of your native image becomes larger
because it's not as smart about selectively compiling method, it just compiles everything.
The progress indicator is perfectly printed periodically at the at an increasing interval and you see
there is like four star here, which means it also takes time and effort for the compiler to finish
this phase, compiling methods and then creating image.
Finally, once everything is done, we know that just like C++ application after compilation, there
is a linking phase and it's the linker that puts all the compiled files together, right, and creates
one native executable.
Same here.
There is a linking phase that happens that puts all the compilations together.
In this stage the native image is created and written to disk.
Debug info is also generated as part of this state.
And what is this debug info here?
It says it gives you some information of what's the total size of the native image here, 11.96 megabyte
and it gives you a kind of a brief breakdown of what is which parts of this.
So what constitutes this total?
11.96 megabyte It tells you that almost four megabyte is for the code area, which consists the binary
code of 7383 compilation unit, just like C++ that each CP file is called a compilation unit here.
Most likely each class file is called a compilation unit almost seven megabyte for Image Heap.
Just this is similar to Java Heap.
Even when you launch the JVM, there is a heap or memory area that stores information 1634 classes and
90,000 objects.
Right.
Objects are stored on the heap and on the stack.
They have pointers to those objects.
One megabyte for other data, just like JVM has meta information, meta space that stores the static
fields or like the class informations for reflection.
It also has to allocate some space for that.
And so it just gives us a breakdown of what's going on.
So code area, the code area contains machine code produced by the compiler for all reachable methods.
Right?
Again, the compiler is smart about which methods to compile and which to not include in the final binary.
If you have turned on the optimization which is already turned on by default, right?
Therefore, reducing the number of reachable methods also reduces the size of the code area.
Makes sense.
Image heap.
So again, code area means the machine code or the assembly code, right?
For the methods.
Each method, the code that is inside each method gets translated into instructions, write assembly
instructions or machine code.
Now obviously, besides that, you need the Java heap, right?
A memory that basically the objects, the state of the objects are stored.
So Image Heap mimics basically the Java heap when you launch your application on a JVM, image heap
contains reachable objects.
These are the state or the data that object is stored right, such as aesthetic data classes initialized
at runtime like static fields and byte array for different purposes.
Now we have general heap data stored byte array similar with JVM.
Right.
There is a byte array that stores data graph encoding is stored in byte array method metadata is stored
in byte array.
I mean, metadata just means some stuff, extra stuff in the class files.
Each object has a class file associated with it.
What this means is that each object or each class has some meta information, right?
So finally, if you have enabled the debug information for the Native Image compiler, it also shows
the debug information.
And you see there is also some other data here.
So other data means the amount of data in the image that is needed in the code area, which means the
instructions machine assembly codes for the methods nor in the image heap object data nor debug information.
And we know that same with the C++ compilers.
You can compile in the debug mode or release mode, which means if you compile in the debug mode, the
binary file has extra information for debugging purposes by default.
If you turn on the optimization for the Native Image compiler, you don't get any debug information.
This data typically contains informal internal information for native image and should not be dominating.
So here it says that one megabyte was for other data.
All right.
So finally, resource usage statistics.
So this this line, this section, and also the GC peak, RSS and CPU load, it just tells you more
information.
It doesn't really it's not directly related to the application.
Job application is just tells you what happened, how much CPU load was doing the compilation, how
much memory was used, garbage collections, the total time spent in all garbage collectors.
Total GC time divided by the total process, time in person and the total number of garbage collections.
A large number of collections or time is spent in collectors usually indicates that the system is under
memory pressure.
Increase the amount of available memory to reduce the time to build the image.
Now what this means is that so what what happens is the graph VM remember we're doing a static compilation,
right?
So it's not like when you run your Java application on the JVM at runtime, some garbage collection
might happen to optimize the memory to compact ify the memory.
But here we're doing a static compilation so that if you allocate a byte array for the Java heap, right?
But then and then.
But this array doesn't dynamically get optimized.
Right.
So when you create your native binary and running despite array might get fragmented because there is
no GC.
So what happens here is that behind the scenes the static compiler actually runs through your Java application
and a native image or the global VM has a GC built in and it actually runs the application, your Java
application and then runs a couple of GC cycles to optimize your image heap.
Right.
So it's very interesting that this happens behind the scene and this is one of the difficulties that
they had to overcome to enable this kind of native, native compilation, which is very interesting
job to do.
It's I'm sure it's not easy, but they were able to do it.
So your native image compiler in order to optimize your application, right.
This image heap which mimics the Java heap, we know that once you allocate and then objects and then
they go out of the scope, your heap becomes fragmented and it's the job of the garbage collector to
reclaim those memory and also compact ify the heap.
So make all the live objects into like put them one after another so that the, the heap is very compact
file.
So it tells you it actually the compiler actually ran through your Java application.
It ran 38 GC cycles to make sure that the image heap that it creates is mimicking a very compact, ified
and optimized version of a java heap.
Right?
So 38 GC cycles were ran before the compiler decides that.
Okay, this the state of the Java here is now is the most optimized.
Let's print it permanently as the image heap, let's say it permanently as the image here.
And it took it becomes about seven megabyte.
All right.
And then peak RSS peak resident said size as reported by the operating system, this value indicates
the maximum amount of memory consumed by the build process.
Now we see when you're when you compile anything, you need some some memory space, some ram so that
the compiler can store some information.
And eventually Linker uses those information to build your binary CPU load.
And this is pretty much self explanatory.
The CPU time used by the process divided by the total process time increase, the number of CPU threads
to reduce the time.
And by default, the native image tries to take advantage of all the threads that your CPU the hardware
provides, so you don't need to pass any flags for changing number of threads.
I recommend you just use the default, whatever the number is for the default threads that the compiler
uses.
So let's go back to our Windows machine.
And as you can see, the compilation has succeeded.
We get my apt exit.
It tells us that we're using the most recent version of the LLVM compiler 22.1, the C compiler.
It was able to find the sealed exit, which is the Microsoft Visual Studio compiler.
And we use the 64 bit configuration.
Right.
And this is the version of the compiler 19.31 The garbage collector is real.
GC It's performing the analysis.
It actually took six stars, so a lot of iterations to try to find all the classes that are all the
methods, all the fields that are related to our job application building universe parsing methods.
It takes two stars.
If I go back to my Linux, you see, under Linux it took one star, but here it took two stars.
So it tried to work a little bit harder in lining methods and in compiling method, creating image image
here it's actually larger.
12.54 megabyte Right.
And it tells me about 4.7 megabyte is for code area, about seven megabyte for image size.
And it tells me it ran 19 GC cycles here.
If you go back to PowerPoint on Linux, it actually ran a 38 GC cycles.
So on different platform, it's going to be different.
And then CPU load one, right?
And eventually we get our executable, see if I clear up and then I just say my underscore app dot exit.
I don't need to really type the exit.
I'm going to do it.
It's going to say Hello World from C++ in Java.
So we successfully compiled our simple Hello World Java application into a native executable binary.
So I hope you really enjoyed this lecture and I've seen the next one.